Here is good.
Thank you.
Good morning, everyone.
Good morning.
Well, let's start this.
I will speak about how to have more non-English speakers
users in general, not only for blue sky and stuff.
I will explain a bit how this is going to work.
I have a little bit of presentation where I will introduce you
to the topic, talk a bit about stuff, and by the end,
I will have a few minutes so we can discuss things, including
people watching from home on streaming plays.
I will read the screenshots if you have any contributions, especially non-
speakers participants will be very welcome to join the discussion at
the end.
Okay.
I figured.
Let me present, introduce myself a little bit.
Oh, sorry.
I forgot the mic.
It's here.
I will introduce myself a
little bit.
I am Victoria.
I'm from Brazil.
My pronouns are Daishi in English.
My handle is vickwalker.
dev.
br on blue sky.
My real occupation is I'm a QA architect for eight
years already.
I also do community moderation job for Brazilian creators for
more around 12 years already.
Also, a little of my background too, I am graduated as game
developer and IT technician.
And I also did, I do a little bit of help translating
some apps even before the AT protocol.
I helped some apps like Twitter.
I don't know if anyone will know this old app for
Twitter.
It was really cool.
And I helped translate a bit for Tokimeki, the blue
sky client from Jap to Portuguese.
So, I use it to be a streamer back in more
than 10 years ago.
But today, I just stream as a hobby.
I also founded AT Brazil that you can find by the
handle atproto.
com.
br.
And I'm based in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Also, you might see my, might find me using this icon a
lot, but everywhere.
But this is then my format.
So, just to know.
Okay, let's go to the main topics I will be talking
about.
So, there's three big topics I want to talk of.
A bit of a problem, a barrier to keep your users that
they don't speak English as a first language.
So, first off, the onboarding.
I want to provoke a little bit of questions for you all.
The first expression is always important.
So, if you, you need to ask, is your onboarding generic
enough for people from multiple countries to understand how to get around
your app or not?
If you are not sure, you can just ask some other, search
for some people that are open to give your feedback.
It's always good.
Also, communication.
After they are using your app, you can't just take that
for granted.
Having a good and healthy communication with your user base is really
good.
And communities will always be very happy to be acknowledged and be
listened to.
So, please, also, be very careful because since people speak different languages
and not the English is not their first language, words can be
understood in different ways.
So, please be very mindful about your wording and stuff.
It can be very impactful of your success of your app.
You can scare away many users.
Also, translation.
I won't go too deep because right after me, my little
friend here, we will have a full talk about the challenges of
translating blue sky to French.
And it's going to go very deeply in this topic, but
I will give a little bit of tips and resources to help
with that.
Like, a little fact check.
Less than 20% of the global population actually speaks English.
So, you can't count if having English is enough for your
app.
Also, be very careful because machine translations doesn't solve everything.
Even with the advanced AI models, you need to be very careful.
I will enter into this topic now a little in a few
minutes.
Okay, let's talk about the onboarding.
Users are having a lot of problems to find what matters
to them.
People that speak their same language.
They are talking about the same topics.
It's relevant.
It's meaningful in the region.
And so, I know it's not easy to solve this problem,
to have a good algorithm.
But you can also have, though, we have a big community of
developers here and builders and stuff.
You can always try to solve this problem together.
Also, the creators also need to understand if it's worth to
use your app.
I'm speaking of content creators in this topic.
There's a lot of creators that are spreading their presence in
multiple platforms.
And it takes effort to do this.
So, if they don't see this effort being off, they might
not try to keep their presence in your app.
So, about the onboarding and stuff, there's a lot of
questions.
How to do the best UX to that in many languages.
Or how to explain the protocol to users that they don't
need multiple accounts if they don't want to use multiple apps.
So, there's always open questions that we don't have the
solid answer yet.
But this group of research will be taking these researches.
So, I recommend you scan this QR code and keep them in
your notes.
Also, I forgot to warn you that I'm going to show
a lot of QR codes.
So, be ready to take the pictures or scan this stuff.
I will wait a little bit.
Ready?
You can always ask me for the links and the presentation after
on blue sky.
I can share those two.
So, also, this wasn't planned originally because when I was here
in the Science Day for the conference, I saw this very interesting
presentation about the style of migration to blue sky for a scientific
community.
And they have a really insightful research in data.
So, if you missed it, that it's okay.
The AT Protoscience will post the recording later.
So, follow AT Protoscience to check this data because it
's not exactly the topic I'm talking about, but this data
is kind of related and useful.
Okay, let's go to communication now.
If you really want to attract a certain audience,
you need to communicate with them, otherwise they might not know about
your app and that your app can be useful to them.
So, they really appreciate the effort to be included in listening to.
You can start doing simple steps like announcing your new features, your
features in different languages.
So, simple text can be handled by machine translators, but I
still be careful about translating more complex text.
I will have a little good example, Leaflet did a really
cool job in the beginning.
They post like, they ask for feedback and requests for different groups
like artists, scientists, fandom people.
And even though they did it in English, they managed to push
new features, very cool features that everyone is benefiting.
I can see some non-English speakers using Leaflet and
enjoying those features.
So, you can do this kind of thing too.
This QR code will take you to this list of posts if
you want.
Also, let's talk about AT Brazil, the work
I'm doing.
AT Brazil, I'm trying to bridge this also, this gap in
communication.
I try to translate in simple ways, in quick ways.
The biggest updates are around the atmosphere, the blue sky stuff, things
I see Brazilians being confused about.
I try to explain in a simple way to everyone to get
and also to provide the technical Brazilian developers the resources to dig
deeper in the information that not always is getting out of the
English bubble inside blue sky and stuff.
That's a thing that I think that more people can do
and will be very helpful to spread the word.
A little bit of reality check.
That QR code in the top right is a graphic to the
most used language in blue sky by day, by week, month and
years.
You can check out and I will just highlight some examples of
the most used language.
Japanese, Portuguese and Spanish.
In Japan, I found that around 28% of the population speaks
English.
In Brazil, it's just 5% of people that is comfortable
speaking English.
In Mexico, around 13%.
And in Spain, 22%.
So, you can see the percentage is not that high, even though
you might think about it was higher.
So, you need to think about it.
Okay.
Translations.
It's not as simple.
I recognize it's not a simple task to have good translations.
Machine translations can't be up to date with new popular ways
to in terms across the internet.
The language is moving really fast around the internet.
So, the translation won't always keep up with that.
I will give a little example in the next slide.
Be cautious of relying on AI because you don't know if
that model is well-trained in that language you want.
There's multiple models that have different training and you
can maybe have more problems relying on that than not.
Localizing your app will make a huge difference, not just translating.
I will give a little bit of examples, but again, the next
talk will go even deeper about this.
My little example is from Twitter.
So, in Brazil, tweets became tweets, right like that, and the
users became known as twitteiros.
Like, this kind of thing, a machine translator won't get for
a long time.
They might know now because Twitter is around for a couple of
years now, but for new apps, you won't know by relying
on machine translations.
A little tips that I see a lot of people struggling around
the atmosphere.
Time zones.
Please avoid using regional names for time zones.
U.
S.
Central doesn't mean anything in Brazil.
Please.
A good way to be safe is using U
TC.
UTC is the universal time for a reason.
UTC is more easy to be understood around the globe.
So, I give you this tip, it's easier.
Because if you also want to list big cities, you will need
a really, really huge list to maintain.
And you might not be familiar with cities from different countries you
never heard about.
So, I think the good old UTC is a safe bet
to go for that.
Now, let's talk about tools to help you translate.
Because I know not everyone has a lot of money and multiple
people inside their teams to help.
So, you can use some tools to have the community to help
you translate.
This one NPM X is using, it's called Lunaria.
You can see in this screenshot, you can see the translation from
Portuguese.
And there's 89 of the strings translated.
So, there's need some updates and it lists how much, what
you need to translate.
Unfortunately, it's a little bit technical.
You need to know how the people translating need to know how
to commit and push code and find those strings.
It's not that simple to use.
There's this tool that is used by Tokimeki.
It's a little bit easier to use.
You can use this interface to see different strings from different languages
to translate.
But it requires a connection with GitHub.
So, having a GitHub account, it's not something that non-dev
s are very familiar with.
But when you have the GitHub account, you can do everything through
this interface.
But that is a point to note that might be a problem
to gather help from non-technical people.
And that is crowding that Blue Sky is using.
It's really less technical.
You don't need to touch code at all.
You just see the text and translate in the app.
They have even mobile app.
So, it's really, really easy to use.
But also, they have some requirements to use this.
So, check if your project can use this first.
Okay.
Now, it's time for the discussion.
I will check the screenshot.
And please, I ask for non-English speakers to bring your
point of view if you are comfortable about some of the topics
I said.
And English speakers, you are welcome to bring questions.
And listen.
So, we have about eight minutes to do this.
Let me see the chat.
Anyone?
There's a microphone.
Thank you.
So, if people can raise hands, I'll bring the mic so
the people on the live stream can hear us.
Yeah.
So, when localizing an app user
interface, is it enough to just translate the words?
Or are there certain different, like, paradigms of control and
layout that you need to be thinking about based on different expectations
from different communities?
Yes, I can give you some examples that will be more in-
depth with the next talk, too, with real examples from French.
But I will give you some examples in Portuguese, too.
So, when translating from English to Portuguese, as an example, there is
a big difference, like, Portuguese, French, Spanish, Italian,
it's all very gendered language.
So, like, imagine if you are translating a word in your interface,
like, followers.
It's a small word.
But in different languages, it can be really big.
And if you want to accommodate different genders, you might need
a bigger space for that.
So, that's a really good problem, a real problem to accommodate
this in your interface.
How you adapt your user interface to bigger translations, words?
How do you make these words short or not?
How do you accommodate the needs?
Yeah, thanks, Victoria, for that.
I will add to that, because, besides French, because I will talk
about French for 30 minutes, and including about gendered language, and
you are not ready for that.
But, also, for other languages, I'm not that familiar about that,
but please keep in mind that there is right-to-left languages,
and this is a big thing about layout and stuff.
So, but one of the main things that I will also say,
but you don't have to do it perfectly at first.
You just have to care.
If you care, it's cool.
Translators will come to you and ask for stuff, and
you will have to understand that their demands make sense.
We don't come to you if we don't think that
it is important for us.
And you just talked about the string length, because the classical example
is German.
German love to agglomerate words into big words, and
you may not have that in mind when you are designing your
beautiful markup.
Of course, you can't simply cut a word anywhere of what
you can do, but you have to think about that.
And if you don't, your buttons will explode, in a way,
in your UI.
So, you may have to think about that, but don't freeze
about that.
Don't say, oh, I won't do internationalization until I
have, you know, X thousand users.
You can try simple things first, and I will actually tell you
a very useful thing in, sorry, I'm teasing, but about how
you can organize your keys, for example.
Hi, thanks for sharing,
and I'm just here, I'd like to share more experience,
like I had a tiny library, just to format numbers, like usually
in English, people use comas for thousands, and a period for
decimals.
Yes.
I'm Brazilian as well, in Brazil, we do the opposite for
whatever reason, and I said, oh, that's simple.
And then I started a library to do that, and it became
a massive rabbit hole, because like, the way people represent negative numbers,
it changed.
People group numbers by three, usually like, in English, in Brazil, but
then I found other countries that group by two numbers, two digits
by digit.
It is massive, like, you cannot imagine how difficult it is, only
for numbers, and then you think about a whole atmosphere, a whole
community, so, yeah.
Anyway, just adding to your question.
Hi, I'm from Japan, and I resonated so much from the
talk, thank you so much.
And my, I have a question, and I get to send an
opinion, so I will do that.
My question is, so, this is great, we're all here, interested
in internationalization.
Where can we go, you know, after we go home, is there
a place to ask these questions, or who do we go to?
Should we make one?
Home.
And then, let me say one more thing.
So, Japanese people are very excited about new, you know, tools and
apps, and love to see it in Japanese, for sure.
So, if you localize it, or make it available for local
ization, they'll be happy to, you know, contribute.
Yeah.
Okay, to organize the, well, we can always create some space
to help organize stuff, people interested in that.
We can figure out together where we can do stuff.
We can start by organizing a blue sky, how to, who is
interested in help, and who needs help, and stuff, and then we
can evolve.
I don't know, like a roomie chat, or something else.
We can always figure out, or if someone else has a good
solution to that.
It's, it's going to be very cool.
Let me check, now, the, the, the, the, the screen, the screen
chat, really quickly.
Yeah, they are, they were talking about, like, if a word is
a metaphor for something technical, a little translation probably won't work
well.
That's a good point.
Yeah, a lot of people are talking, like, caring is the, the,
the, the most important part.
Oh, there is, roomies want to help with organizing, but it
's still very work in progress.
Okay.
Maybe just to add a little thing about that.
First of all, about a space to, to talk with each other.
I think that a roomie chat or something could be cool,
but just so you know, we already have a discord for the
translators of the blue sky open source project, because we have
some time to, you know, to coordinate or to ask Samuel for
what, what is this new feature that you are shipping.
Um, but also, um, um, about, you know, the numbers, because you
talked about numbers and dates, just, I just, I, I, I won
't be able to talk about that in the talk, but please
rely on the browser.
Chrome, Firefox, Safari, they all, uh, took a lot of time to
do it correctly using what, uh, Unicode standard, uh, provide,
and it will really simply handle everything that you will, uh, throw
at them.
Uh, those, uh, I would say weird, but no, no, no, no
offense intended.
Those strange way of organizing numbers are actually very well, um, uh,
supported by, um, uh, by, uh, the browser.
It's the same for dates, you know, writing dates in the
right format.
EE, not with month, starting with the month, you know, um, and
everything like that are actually, uh, supported by this browser.
Yeah.
Okay.
I have just one last slides to thank you.
Obrigada.
Everyone.
This car code, this car code will,
uh, take you to my Blento with my information.
I have, uh, a link to shadow, uh, uh, meeting with, uh,
online with me if you want.
Uh, I will be available after the conference, uh, for that.
Or if you are in person, you can scan my you and
me, uh, my you and me in person.
But I also have a little Brazilian gift to give it to
today.
So that's it.
Thank you.
Obrigada.